An easier way to write c code with the mls library.

TL;DR: examples/04---advanced-strings/adv-string.c: demonstrate_string_concatenation()

This approach aims to minimize the direct use of pointers by replacing
direct memory access with helper functions that use handles - simple
integer values - to reference memory blocks. Each handle references a
structure that describes a specific memory block. The structure
describes the element width, number of stored elements and buffer
capacitiy.  By maintaining the buffer size and the element count as
separate fields, appending new elements becomes an efficient
operation. In my experience, this design proves to be both practical
and frequently utilized.  The library provides the m_put(M, ptr)
function to add elements to any array type, automatically resizing as
needed while preserving the handle.

One of the key advantages of this approach is the use of typeless
integer handles as references to arbitrary arrays. This abstraction
allows any data structure to be represented and manipulated through a
uniform interface—typically as arrays of integers—enabling a flexible
and generalized framework for managing even complex data layouts.

Consider a typical scenario where you define a structure, e.g., struct
foo { ... }, and use a typed pointer like struct foo *foo_ptr
throughout your codebase. In more complex cases, you might work with
arrays, such as struct foo foodata[100]. This introduces additional
concerns: you need to manage the size of the array, ensure correct
pointer usage, and write code that is tightly coupled to the
structure’s type.

By contrast, using handles allows you to pass simple integers that
refer to memory blocks or positions within those blocks, abstracting
away the need for direct type-dependent pointer arithmetic. This
decouples your logic from specific data types and significantly
improves safety: all memory access through handles can be
bounds-checked, preventing out-of-bounds errors and reducing the
likelihood of undefined behavior.

In summary, typeless handles promote more modular, type-agnostic, and safer code.

Since the handle remains constant until the array is explicitly freed,
it can be safely used throughout the program without needing
re-assignment. This consistency also allows functions to accept arrays
as arguments more flexibly. For example, the well known 'ssize_t
getline(char **lineptr, size_t *n, FILE *stream)' function, could
instead be adapted to use a handle, as in 'int getline(int my_array,
FILE *stream)'. 

An additional advantage is that handles are always positive
integers. This allows functions to return the handle itself when
successful or, if needed, a negative value to indicate an error code,
enabling quick and easy error handling.

To aid in debugging, mls.h provides a suite of macros designed to
simplify error tracking. A brief demonstration of the error-handling
mechanisms can be found in examples/03---error-handling.
For commonly used functions, macros are available that automatically
capture the source file, line number, and function name from which an
mls function is invoked. This debug information is only active when
MLS_DEBUG is defined.
If the program terminates unexpectedly, the last called mls function
and the exact location from which it was invoked are displayed, making
it easier to trace and diagnose the issue.

The source code for memory management functions is located in lib/mls.c.

Notes: the mls.c source code has been refined over the past 20 years
and is considered stable and safe for use.  The m_tool.c file contains
a collection of handy utility functions, originally written to support
rapid development—similar to how one might use a scripting language
for quick tasks but is not as thoroughly tested as 'mls.c'.

That said, the project would benefit from more consistent and
descriptive function naming. It could also be significantly improved
by expanding its support for database and file handling operations.

jens harms, 2024-11-06
au1064 at gmail dot com
